---
title: 不要向欲望让步
tags: 哲 LIFE
---



> Freud uses three distinct terms for the agency that propels the subject to act ethically: he speaks of ideal ego (Idealich), ego-ideal (Ich-Ideal) and superego (Über-Ich).
> For Lacan, superego ‘has nothing to do with moral conscience as far as its most obligatory demands are concerned’: superego is, on the contrary, the anti-ethical agency, the stigmatization of our ethical betrayal. So which one of the other two (ideal ego, ego-ideal) is the proper ethical agency?
> For Lacan, the only proper agency is the fourth one missing in Freud’s list of three, the one sometimes referred to by Lacan as ‘the law of desire’, the agency that tells you to act in accord with your desire.
> The gap between this ‘law of desire’ and Ego-Ideal (the network of socio-symbolic norms and ideals that the subject internalizes in the course of his or her education) is crucial here.
> For Lacan, the seemingly benevolent agency of the Ego-Ideal that leads us to moral growth and maturity forces us to betray the ‘law of desire’ by way of adopting the ‘reasonable’ demands of the existing socio-symbolic order.
> The superego, with its excessive feeling of guilt, is merely the necessary obverse of the Ego-Ideal: it exerts its unbearable pressure upon us on behalf of our betrayal of the ‘law of desire’.
> The guilt we experience under superego pressure is not illusory but actual – ‘the only thing of which one can be guilty is of having given ground relative to one’s desire’, and superego pressure demonstrates that we effectively are guilty of betraying our desire.

> -- Chap 5, How to Read Lacan, Slavoj Žižek